welcome to San Diego integral February
10th
2024 our topic today LSD and the mind of
the universe diamonds from Heaven
presented by Chris
bash welcome to San Diego
integral um I'm Tom khabib and I'm a
member of the leadership team we have an
exciting presentation today l y in the
mind of the
universe we'll begin shortly but I first
wanted to mention that we're recording
this meeting if you prefer not to be
seen on video you can turn your camera
off although we love to see your
reactions uh the link to the recording
will be posted on Meetup a day or two
after this event on
sdi's uh YouTube
channel also you can find future events
on our website either Sand Diego
enworld.org the Facebook page or coming
back to meetup.com
um the advantage of joining one of these
groups is that you'll automatically be
notified for future
presentations if you have any questions
today um about these meetings you're are
welcome to contact one member of the
leadership team any member next month
we're meeting March 9th and the speaker
is to be
determined but it's going to be similar
to today Chris was nice enough to do a
pre-presentation of what he's going to
talk about at the future human
conference in May and San inro gets
exclusive rights to
this finally we invite you to make a
small donation today to help cover the
cost of our meetings and
equipment and you can make that donation
at SLE
in.org
I want to introduce
Chris so as you've heard he's going to
be a keynote presenter the upcoming icon
conference the future
human uh Chris is a professor ameritus
in the department of philosophy and
religion religious studies at Youngstown
State University where he taught for 33
years he's also adjunct faculty at the
California Institute of interr
studies and at The noetic Sciences
Institute and also on the advisory
Council of stanlos gr's Legacy
training one might ask how does a boy
raised in the Deep South that is
Vicksburg
Mississippi uh who was raised Roman
Catholic and actually entered the
Seminary to become a priest write a book
about his 20year journey with
LSD it appears that Chris's Devotion to
transformation appeared relatively
early just as he was receiving his
degree from Notre Dame's theology
department and he was awarded ex award
for excellence he decided to leave
Catholicism
this radical transformation occurred
again at Brown
University halfway through his doctoral
program he realized that he had gotten
what he wanted from biblical studies and
his uh and in his
words I changed horses and began
again those of us in integral studies
recognize this Fidelity to what wants to
emerge
although we may not always have the
courage for radical
Transformations Chris has now fashioned
himself into a philosopher of
religion he settled into Youngstown
University where he would teach for the
next 33
years along the way another
transformation was
pending Chris red stanoff gr work on
work on the use of psychedelics and
Psychotherapy the nonat non-dogmatic
influences of Buddhism and Houston Smith
perennialism we know and integral soon
followed Chris ended his psychedelic
Explorations in
1999 and it was until 2009 he wrote his
first book The Living
classroom here he shared how his
expansive Consciousness seemed to impact
his students in what he called leaky
boundaries again those of us in integral
recognize the psychoactive effect
presencing has upon
others in
20199 he wrote LSD in the mind of the
universe diamonds from heaven some of
which he'll share today and at the
conference please give Chris bash a warm
sandal integral
welcome thank you
everyone it's a pleasure to be here with
you
tonight
uh since I my understanding is that
psychedelics is not a frequent topic uh
in the integral community in the San
Diego integral community so in talking
uh with Kathy and Tom and people on your
board and we decided that we'd begin
with a short breakout before I talk
before I say anything just to do a quick
inventory together of what each each of
your backgrounds is with psychedelics
both in terms of whether you have any
psychedelic experience and if you have
what have you had it with
what context real short and the second
part is what kind of beliefs have you
formed about psychedelics either from
your own experience or from your reading
or conversations with other people so
both what is your the nature of your
experience and what are your beliefs and
perceptions about psychedelics so we'll
do it before and then after our talk
we'll do an after okay so just about 10
minutes and Kathy will break you up into
two uh groups
Kathy breakout sessions are not
recorded okay is everybody
back yeah I think we're back roll back
okay I sure wish I didn't want to
encroach on your freedom I didn't want
to be part of the groups I wanted you to
have complete freedom to be able to say
what was on your mind but I sure wish I
could have been on the in the wall and
heard your answers to the questions
maybe when we get a little farther down
the uh the line this evening in dialogue
um you know I can learn what some of
your answers were to the questions so
all right so we've kind of looked at our
history in terms of our own experience
with psychedelics and what our own
beliefs positive negative or neutral
around psychedelics and now I'm just
going to jump in and uh take you on a
ride uh and take you give you an
overview of my work uh that I've
reported in my book LSD in the mind of
the universe so let me share a screen
here first of all let me ask first how
many people have read my book just
perfectly okay if you haven't how many
people have just wondering okay good all
right good to know um all right let me
see if I can share my
screen okay and
uh just confirming we can see your
screen you can see good am I seeing
whoop supposed to go back all right
okay somehow I wish I could get the
whole screen to show
okay
[Music]
so I'm a unusual person and that I've
been a university Professor all my life
teach a professor of religious studies
teaching in a small College State
College in Northeast Ohio and I've also
uh done one of the longest regimens of
highdose LSD work that I'm aware of uh
in the background I couldn't talk about
it until after I retired because the
good state of Ohio the citizens of Ohio
don't like their University professors
doing massive doses of LSD on the
weekends but uh so the hardest thing
about trying to introduce my work uh for
the first time is how long it lasted and
how many layers of Consciousness I
accessed in the process of this long
20-year journey and I think that uh many
of our expectations about where
psychedelics can take us or should take
us have been shaped by accounts based on
a very small data set for
example when alus Huxley wrote his very
important book doors of the perception
in
1954 he had taken mesculin only one time
and he took El psychedelics only a total
of 10 times in his life similarly when
Houston Smith the great historian of
religion wrote his book cleansing the
doors of perception he had taken LSD
only six times after that he said uh the
bummers increased and that led him to
take Alan Watts's advice when you get
the message hang up the phone but notice
this gives a sense that you you do
psychedelics you get the message that's
it that's what it's about and uh my book
is what happens if you don't hang up the
phone but moving on we go to Michael
pollen's very influential book how to
change your mind and Michael had taken
psychedelics only about a half dozen
times by the time he wrote this
book other developments have tended to
give us a sort of a shortened
metaphysical Horizon in terms of what we
can expect to experience uh with
psychedelics for
example the Psychedelic Renaissance
right now is focused on exploring the
capacity of psychedelics to heal the
wounds of the personal psyche when if
you're in touch with the the Psychedelic
literature
it's dominated by the studies which are
demonstrating psychedelics various
capacities to heal uh the wounds of life
whether it's post-traumatic stress or
depression or addiction uh we're finding
they're very powerful but this tends to
focus us on the horizon of the personal
unconscious a second use of psychedelics
different but similar is using
psychedelics for Spiritual Awakening as
we see in this Anthology zigzag Zen
which is is a discussion between the
Psychedelic community and the uh
Buddhist community on the relevance of
psychedelics for Spiritual Awakening but
still we're still thinking in terms of a
kind of an individual level individual
spiritual
enlightenment these two categories the
therapeutic and the spiritual awakening
these are the major kind of topics that
come up for discussion I think uh in
today's psychedelic Renaissance and my
work is different than this I was
trained as a philosopher of religion I'm
not a therapist I'm not a
psychotherapist not a psychologist I
primarily was interested have been
interested in the philosophical
potential of psychedelics so my work
really falls into a third category where
the project is cosmological exploration
not healing not really aiming at
Awakening but using these deep
non-ordinary states to explore the Deep
structure of
reality my work descends are derives
from Stan Gro I was just out of graduate
school and I encountered this book by
Stan Realms of the human unconscious
which was followed by his manual LSD
Psychotherapy and of course all the
Dozen or 15s or so books had followed a
very important works and in these two
early Works danan clearly differentiates
between lowd do psychotic therapy and
highd dose psychedelic therapy a very
different therapeutic regimen
psycholytic pealing the unconscious
layer by layer like an onion psychedelic
trying to generate a breakthrough uh a a
one maximum Supreme dose kind of
approach here the Spring Grove Hospital
was working with terminally ill patients
trying to trigger something
approximating a near-death experience to
give them a glimpse of where they were
going when they died but the Psychedelic
therapy was limited to three doses three
sessions so you have low dose many
sessions psychedelic very few I came
along in
1978 and I thought well if you could do
psychedelic therapy three times you
could probably do it safely more than
three times so for various reasons I
chose to work uh in a psychedelic
therapy protocol and in the end Between
1979 and
1999 I did 73 high do LSD sessions
actually I did three moderate doses but
then I did all
high and you
see B Doll
okay so I just say 73 high do
sessions and I did this in a very
rigorous F fashion following Stan's
protocol in my case I use the same
protocol same set in setting same
substance same dose level same sitter
same recording process in same location
I try to standardize all the variables
as much as possible so as to ensure
clean and consistent recurring contact
with the Deep structure deeper levels of
consciousness uh and when I got to the
end of my journey and was trying to
organize the the sessions into the
narrative that I put into the book I
began to realize that this really was a
very different undertaking than
psychedelic therapy I was dealing with a
number of different issues that don't
come up in psychedelic therapy and so I
felt the new terminology was required
and so I call my protocol psychedelic
exploration it's not really therapeutic
in its agenda it's psychedelic therapy
in its Tech in its techniques it's high
do isolated sha Shades sitter music
whole thing but it is uh more than three
doses it's my case 73 and the project in
psychedelic exploration is cosmological
exploration it's not primarily healing
though there was a great deal of healing
it's not primarily Spiritual Awakening
it is exploring the Deep structure of
the
universe so I kept very detailed records
of everything going through even looked
at some of the astrological
variables kept records of every session
made within 24 hours of the session
itself and what I'm writing about in uh
LSD in the mind of the universe is not
primarily my personal story I mean it's
all personal of course and I own it but
these lines represent a series of
sessions and the small circles represent
what's taking place in the beginning and
ending of a session the large circles or
what's taking place during the peak
hours of the
session and LSD in the mind of the
universe is basically describing what
took place
in the peak hours of the sessions over
the course of 73 sessions it's primarily
a cosmological narrative it's not a
therapeutic narrative I drop out a lot
of the a lot of the examples of personal
healing or personal insights which were
given to me before at the beginning and
ending of the sessions but when I was
operating in the peak session I was
usually operating far beyond personal
reality the personal segment and that's
the the part that I think has the most
important philosophical relevance the
cosmological
relevance so just to give you one more
important concept before we turn to
looking at the book itself it's what I
call the spal of death and rebirth
everything below this line is time and
space and our ordinary Consciousness
above the line transpersonal
Consciousness the drop at the bottom of
this what my students sometimes would
call the panty hole model of
Consciousness this drop represents egoic
Consciousness our time space identity
everything above the line in the in the
between the blue lines represents
various orders of transpersonal
Consciousness and of course to make a
transition from our egoic space-time
identity into spiritual reality involves
going through some type of death of self
or uh ego death in order to basically
let the programming of our time space
identity uh be dissolved or be shattered
or be melted so that we can enter into
deeper States Of
Consciousness and while ego death gets a
lot of the attention in the therapeutic
literature and appropriately so in my
journey ego death turned out to be only
one of a number of deaths that took
place at different levels
of the journey and this is what I call
the spiral of death and rebirth what I
found is that when you're entering a
deeper level of transpersonal
Consciousness you have to go through a
death and rebirth even after ego death
you go through multiple layers of deaths
and rebirths and the nature of that
death is very It's tricky to describe
because it's it's a type of death and
rebirth that takes place far beyond
egoic Consciousness far beyond anything
to do with space-time Consciousness and
it changes as the adventure deepens and
here I use Stan and Ken Wilbur's
categories of psychic subtle and causal
reality to describe some of these levels
I don't have any vested interest in a
particular cosmology a particular
identifying of levels or rating of
levels this is basically just to
indicate a pattern and the pattern is
their many levels of consciousness in
spiritual reality and you go through
many levels of death and rebirth in a if
you access these levels of consciousness
in a systematic fashion and this is why
I EMP emphasize the standardization of
the protocol in my work because I think
the more standardized uh our protocol
the more we basically return to the same
membrane the same platform of interface
between our individual Consciousness and
this larger Consciousness and it makes
in my case it led to a Perpetual
deepening of the experience a Perpetual
series of initiations and entering into
deeper communion with the creative
intelligence of the
universe
now when I got to the end of my journey
was working on preparing for the book
doing the book I identified five areas
or cluster areas or levels of
consciousness that my experiences kind
could be grouped in so here are the five
levels that stand out for me one is the
level of personal
mind Collective mind or our species
mind archetypal
mind causal
Oneness and Diamond
Luminosity so what I'd like to do is
simply
go through and throw up the the chapter
titles of the book and organize them
according to these levels of
consciousness and give you a quick
overview a quick thumbnail of just some
of the stages of this journey this is
extremely frustrating for me to do
because just to convey adequately the
content of one deep psychedelic
experience is very challenging and would
take a while Juliana of Norwich the
Great the British Mystics spent decades
digesting one particular trans spiritual
near-death episode experience that she
had and to try to summarize 20 years of
such
experiences uh is is challenging
especially and I should have mentioned
this before I was working at 500 to 600
micrograms which is right at the peak of
what the body's tolerance is in terms of
you don't get higher if you take more
so I was working with very high doses
and this is a protocol I do not
recommend today if I were doing it
myself again uh over I would do it
differently I'd be much gentler on
myself but nevertheless this is what I
did and this is where we went so let me
just go through
them first the level of personal mind
this is a chapter called crossing the
boundary of birth and death this is what
Stan gr calls the crossing the perinal
level of Consciousness the level of
Consciousness between our time space
identity and spiritual
reality it involves confrontations with
death lots of fetal Sensations often
reliving uh one's
birth uh very extreme um facing deep
alienation uh the question is whether
life has any meaning whatsoever because
everyone we know and everything we know
and everyone we love is going to be dead
including ourselves How can there be any
meaning in a universe where everything
the value
dies uh which eventually culminates in
in our time space identity our ego death
identity being turned inside out and for
me this took about 10 sessions and two
and a half years of work until
eventually the universe got me to a
point where it just snapped me like a
twig it turned me into the exact
opposite of everything i' had ever known
myself to be and and radically expanded
the boundaries of my awareness I thought
I was a a male white University
Professor concerned with the meaning of
existence it turned me into hundreds of
women women of color women who had no
interest in philosophy or the meaning of
existence and it just snapped me it
forced me it just snapped me and the
message was uh where you were going
gender does not exist let go go and of
course the the problem was not women and
or education or anything like that the
problem was the tight role that my
social identity had on me that was
confining the limits of my
experience after I let go and
surrendered I was taken under the arm of
the great mother and given a wonderful
long many hour uh journey into the world
of women becoming hundreds of women uh
in all sorts of life life
circumstances and then the con Journey
continued the next several sessions come
under the category of collective mind or
eego mind excuse me uh species
mind
now working at these do levels the way I
worked my experience was that more or
less every session began with the first
portion of the session being a a
purification of uh detoxification
process the dying process the second
portion of the session being a uh a
Transcendent experience an ecstatic
experience um transpersonal teaching
instruction and so uh on the first half
of the next year of session I entered a
domain that I came to call the ocean of
suffering I was repeatedly and
systematically emerged in a collective
anguish that shattered all my frames of
reference it completely dwarfed the
previous F phase I entered a domain that
expanded to Encompass the entire history
of the human species the dying in this
level was almost entirely Collective the
surrender was the or that the surrender
that was demanded was the ordeal of
repeatedly opening to the the sheer
enormity and savagery of the ocean of
pain that I was encountering I did not
understand what was
happening um but for several hours in
every session and then I it would get
into this ocean of suffering and then I
would be spun into what I'll describe in
a minute at first I thought this
represented a deepening of my ego death
but it went on for so long and it
involved so many thousands of people
that I eventually came to a very
different conclusion and this is really
the major theme of my second book dark
night early Dawn and that is I think
what happened is in my sessions and in
many of our sessions when we reach this
level uh the universe used my sessions
not to heal me or not to try to
enlighten me but to heal some aspect of
humanity at large to heal some aspect of
the collective psyche and just as an IND
individual internalizes trauma in their
unconscious which then distorts their
well-being the human species likewise
internalizes all the trauma of History
anything that's not resolved by the end
of our individual lifetimes the species
internalizes all the trauma from all the
wars and all the deaths and all the
droughts and all the hunger and it
Aggregates in the collective psyche
distorting the functioning of the
collective psyche and in these unusual
highly expanded Amplified States Of
Consciousness I think what happens is we
open up to the depths of the collective
unconscious and in that process we have
an opportunity to take on and uh
experience some of the depths of these
terrible memories and in that process
lift them from the collective
psyche now when I went through each
stage each day of the collective ocean
of suffering in the first year in the
second half of the session I entered
what I came to call Deep time in the
soul for seven sessions an entire year I
entered a reality where I experienced my
entire life from beginning to end as a
completed whole I moved Beyond linear
time not into eternity in between linear
Time and Eternity there many modalities
of time and these I came to call Deep
time where you could experience
different spans of time as
simultaneously present or you could
experience time speeding up or moving
into evolutionary speed so to speak for
one year I experienced my life in all of
its moments from start to finish as
simultaneously present now it was a very
powerful distillation of my life's work
of who I was be doing this work with
what my life was
about and at this point I ended this
represented four years of work and about
uh 18 17 sessions and at this point I
stopped my work for six years for
reasons that I go into in the
book six years later I started my work
again and when I did the ocean of
suffering began exactly where it was
where it had stopped six years before so
there was a year of the ocean of
suffering before my six-year break and a
year of the ocean of suffering after
that six-year break and the Precision
with which this started again and kept
getting deeper and deeper and deeper is
a measure I think uh an indicator of the
magnitude and precision of the
intelligence which was guiding uh these
sessions and the positive side once I
went through through the ocean of
suffering in this next year of session I
entered a a domain of Consciousness
which took me radically beyond anything
to do with my personal reality into the
universe the mind of the universe in a
section I call initiation into the
universe different time of life
different expectations different
astrological transits deep into the
belly of the
Universe I was given a series of
carefully orchestrated teachings
initiations
into the cosmic order of things now I
always give all my sessions a name just
simply as a nemonic device I write down
my sessions I I put them down on bullet
points I give them a name in order to
help me remember because I want to
remember my entire Journey all at once
the names help me here are the names of
the sessions that I present in this
chapter initiation into the
universe and you can see just from the
nature of the names how profoundly
transpersonal these experiences were and
I and frustrating not to be able to tell
you more about them but I just can't
there's not time uh deep Excursion in
like cosmology
101 uh How the Universe works as at a
fundamental
level when the ocean of suffering came
to a culmination in the 24th session
healing the collective wound there was
sort of a an an orgy of feeding on the
pain and it reached a culmination and I
was spun into a level of reality that I
came to understand as archetypal reality
and I discussed this phase of the work
in the chapter the greater real of
archetypal
reality this lasted about 11 sessions
and one and a half
years and every time I entered this
reality I entered a level of reality
that was more real than space time it's
a very disorienting experience at first
but every time I went there I was
engaging something that was more real
than space time and also ancient
it was just ancient Beyond imagination
time worked at a completely different
scale there a completely different order
of reality I felt like Plato's prisoner
having climbed out of the cave entering
in a more level a more real level of
reality in in the universe than my own
existence in
SpaceTime when I began to enter
archetypal
reality I went through a death process
in which I began I had to die as a human
being per
se I found that there is a level of
identity that we hold in our
psyche simply by virtue of being a human
being it's more fundamental than than
ego identity and to go through species
ego death or to Slough off your entire
history as a human species and all the
cognitive parameters that go with being
a member of the human species is a
deeper form of surrendering to the great
unknown than simply letting go of your
individual egoic
identity the
transition to was to very very high
levels of energy I learned in the
process that high levels deep levels of
consciousness repres are driven by high
levels of energy the deeper you go the
higher the energy and if you want to
have abiding stable experiences in in
these levels of reality you must go
through the purification detoxification
process that allows you to to maintain
clear cognition at these deep levels of
reality
uh and that means adjusting uh
submitting yourself to these levels of
energy which in my case had the flavor
of white hot lava flows exploding sunfl
flares Liquid Fire pouring through me CH
changing me
completely
now I would experience archetypal
reality is having two levels one is kind
of the platonic type level where I
experience principles or beings I don't
really want to call them beings because
that makes them sound too compact more
principles Cosmic principles that were
clearly the constitutive principles
responsible for creating creating space
time and some of the structures in space
and time but they were so large so vast
I could not wrap my mind around them the
best my mind could do to giving them
some type of semblance of form is that I
saw them as galaxies hundreds of light
years across but galaxies very vast
moving on a different order of scale
than our small solar system so I spent
some time there at then I also spent
some time in uh ex experiencing at what
you might think of as a More yian Level
the living tissue of our species I was
given the experience over and over again
of experiencing our species as a single
being a single
mind and each of us are cells within
this mind fractal iterations within this
mind and even each of our bodies sell
within the collective body so that there
was nothing private about our existence
neither our personal psychological
issues or our physical issues our
diseases all of them were in a back and
forth process osmotic process between
the individual and the species as a
whole CH can I ask a question here sure
so I mean this is a really good point uh
where you are right now because in the
book you mentioned you know how we're
being guided gently that when we have
deep subtle
Intuition or something in
creativity would it be correct to say
it's either these Cosmic principles or
the Council of the elders influencing
our development Now That We're Not
Alone we are absolutely not alone uh the
universe is the hyper intelligent hyper
conscious hyper compassionate hyper
wisdom we it infuses us every minute of
the day uh whether we're paying
attention to it or not taking advantage
of it or not but if we tune into it if
we step away from our narrow focus and
tune
into uh deeper levels of our
Consciousness which then open into
subtler and subtler levels of
consciousness one does receive help one
receives healing and advice and insight
and these can these come from multiple
potential levels of
consciousness uh and so I I would
hesitate to identify a source that they
would come from it's more a matter of an
infinitely deep source that you can draw
from at multiple different levels yeah
so um a lot of integral people they're
aware of in a moment of creativity in
connection that somehow they become a
vehicle for what wants to be expressed
absolutely so that's an alignment yeah a
deep alignment you just become
transparent I mean basically when you
drop underneath your personal identity
when you kind of Pierce the membrane and
pop the bubble and drop beneath that and
then into the mind of the of the species
beneath that into different levels of
the creative mind uh you you become
transparent the joy is that in becoming
shat empty empty of self becoming
transparent I like that translation of
shunyata transparent you become
transparent to these deeper orders of
awareness that then kind of come through
you they uh they they nourish you with
healing with love and with insight and
creativity
yeah oh one one final comment yeah
is whatever this intelligence is in the
universe is grooming us to participate
in this
intelligence grooming is might be a
little strong but I understand I want to
say yes but I might sort of choose
different more words than grooming but
it and we are of the same stuff it is
large we are small relatively speaking
but uh we are of the same part of the
same stuff and we are always in
communion with each other so it's more
like older brother younger brother older
sister younger sister I think of the
spiritual Universe Dwayne Elgen talks
about it as the mother universe and time
space is the daughter universe and so
naturally there's a a relationship
between mother and
daughter you wouldn't say the mother is
grooming the daughter but the mother
brings the daughter along yeah
yeah
okay
uh I began to have experiences at this
level of
reincarnation as a collective process I
had experiences in which I witnessed the
entire uh planet and the entire species
reincarnating in a pulse that moved
through history so I had written my book
my first book was on reincarnation and
so I was I construed reincarnation
classically the way it's usually
construed as a story of the Soul's
journey toward Enlightenment uh Lifetime
by LifeTime making progress making
clearing mistakes so on so forth but it
was an individual Journey we're all on
individual Journeys and here instead I
was dissolved into the species as the
entire species went into an intelligent
articulate Collective Karma uh though
that is too crude a phrase an
intelligence that was growing itself
Generation by Generation generation by
generation and somehow all of our
individual soul project s fit inside
beautifully magnificently inside this
Collective Soul
project now here are the names of the
sessions that I address in this
particular
chapter I won't go into them but except
to mention notice how much cleansing is
still taking place at this pretty
advanced
level session 28 was a very deep session
it was an archetypal meltdown it threw
me very briefly into the next higher
level of consciousness of very extremely
Pure Clean crystallin level of
Consciousness and even though I was only
in that reality for a number of minutes
I think it triggered a cleansing a
detoxification that lasted six months in
three sessions just an ordeal of just
cleansing and cleansing and cleansing
hard to describe the cleansing because
it's it's not a matter of personal
history it's partly biological it's
partly emotional it's it's partly subtle
energy uh it it's just a radical
cleansing in order to allow me to come
back into that highly pure highly
refined energy with clear cognition
which took place by the 32nd and 33rd
session and then
continued into the next
year
of a year that I describe in the book
called the benediction of
blessings this was an extraordinary year
uh after archetyp of
reality uh in which I was given just a
series of one
extraordinary transpersonal blessing
after another these are the four
sessions that covering a Year's work uh
that I addressed in the book The Forest
was an experience of Oneness and no self
shat emptiness of self no self in me no
self anywhere in the world a universal
Force running through the forest not not
caring at all whether it's animating a
pine tree or an oak tree deep experience
of Oneness and Oneness and emptiness are
two sides of the same coin yeah when you
experience deep Oneness it's immediately
obvious obvious that there is no
separate self anywhere in the world we
are all interdependent and intertwined
and when you experience deep no self
then Oneness the Oneness of Life
manifests spontaneous it's just they
they go hand in hand singing the
universe away was an experience a deep
experience of the Void the Primal void
out of which the universe
Springs Jesus's blood was an experience
of cosmic love being loved more deeply
than I'd ever known love in my life just
overwhelming immersion uh in Cosmic Love
and the birth of the diamond soul I just
want to mention this because it'll come
up later
um how to put this succinctly it was a I
experienced all of my former lives
coming into me uh just like wrapping
string around a kite spool just coming
back very fast I had done three years of
past life hypnotherapy and I had a
pretty good sense of some of my former
lives but they came back very quickly
and they reached a point where they
seemed to hit a critical mass and they
fused and when they fused there was an
enormous explosion and the diamond light
broke out of my chest and catapulted me
into a very high and subtle State of
Consciousness in which I was an
individual but I was an individual
Beyond any frame of reference that I had
known up to that point in time and over
time this is what I came to understand
or call the birth of the diamond soul my
understanding is when we die we return
to the soul which is the larger
Consciousness that holds all of our
experience when we incarnate we shrink
down get small focus when we die we get
large we incarnate we get small so on
and so forth but we return to the soul
if all goes well many times after our
incarn
Nations What's Happening Here I think
what happened in my session and I think
what's happening in our historical
progression is that the soul is being
born inside time and space that if you
keep going back and forth between
expansion into the world of spirit and
back into time and space and you keep
this up long
enough thousands and thousands and
thousands of years sooner or later
doesn't it make sense that the soul
would awaken eventually inside our
incarnate
existence so that the awareness of
identity or the nature of identity that
we claim in that Incarnation is the soul
as our identity and with this comes a
vast expansion of the heart a deep
opening of the Mind a deep Embrace of
compassion or Awakening of compassion
passion the birth of the diamond
soul I was 15 years into my journey uh I
had was had received more blessings than
I could have
imagined what I I had been asked to give
something in the ocean of suffering work
and I had been rewarded with more
blessings than I could count but there
was still 5 years remaining in my
journey and this is when I went through
yet another death and re birth process
and entered what I call the domain of
diamond
Luminosity I entered a
reality that was exceptionally clear it
was light but a particular quality of
light I had known light many times
before people often experience great
light when they go through ego death and
I had in a different stages I'd
experienced light but when I talk about
the diamond light I'm not simply using
using a metaphor for the light I'm
trying to describe a particular quality
of light exceptionally clear very very
pure just so clear it takes your breath
away this is what I think Buddhism calls
dharmakaya the clear light of absolute
reality over the next four years and 26
sessions this is about a third of all
the sessions I did I only entered this
reality four times here are the names of
these four
sessions in between these sessions more
in more purification more detoxification
more teaching more absorbing of
lessons uh but these four immersions
into the crystallin quality of diamond
Luminosity again so much to say and so
little time I'm just going to have to
stop I'll mention only that the first
two sessions took me deeper and deeper
into the diamond luminosity and after
that there was a reverse of pivot and
then in the last two of these sessions
the diamond Luminosity was crunching
itself deeper and deeper into my mind
into my personality into my physiology
into my
biochemistry and this is
it was in the 50th session that I had a
particular experience in the diamond
Luminosity that changed radically my
understanding of
existence one of the reasons I pushed so
hard in my work is that I I thought the
purpose of this work was to get to a
particular condition to get to the an
end stage to get home to become one with
the universe or one with the metac
cosmic void and I had many experiences
of Oneness and had learned that there
are degrees of Oneness and I had had
experiences of the Primal void and i'
learned that there are even degrees of
the Void though that sounds like a
contradiction in
terms but in the peak of the diamond
Luminosity when I was as deep into the
diamond Luminosity as I would ever go in
my
journey I was sitting and resting
comfortably intact in a a deeply
Blissful State and my visual field
pivoted 90 degrees and the
a circle opened and I saw in the far far
distance a reality far beyond the
diamond luminosity and there was a
domain of light there and a ray of light
came out of that reality and hit me and
it absolutely shattered me it took me
minutes to
recover and that's when I
understand that it's an infinite
progression we'll never get to the end
of it even using this very aggressive
mode of of transition of exploration I
would never get to the end the the mind
of the universe is just too vast too big
and that the thought there is a
homecoming to this work and one does
experience homecoming but the idea that
there is an end to get to that will
change
everything I don't think so Oneness is a
beautiful powerful important teaching
but even Oneness does not not exhaust
all there is to learn uh from the
universe now you notice that I've
skipped a chapter chapter nine I'm going
to try to speed this up
here uh and this is the
chapter called the birth of the future
human when I began this work in
1979 I never imagined that Humanity's
future would become part of my journey
and now I think this chapter may be the
most important chapter of the book
because it speaks to the fate of our
planet the fate of our species it speaks
to our children's World our children's
children as far as we can see it speaks
of a Crossroads that humanity is coming
to and of the powerful forces taking us
into a future that will change us at the
deepest levels of our
being now what I did is that over the
course of my journey I had numerous
visions that kept popping up here and
there different Visions about Humanity
Humanity spiritual Evolution where
Humanity was that Humanity was coming to
a turning point a before and after
moment in history this kept coming up in
lots of different places so what I did
was to rather than address them all
peace meal chapter by chapter I gathered
them all into this particular chapter
and I broke this down into two sections
the first first are the visions of
Awakening which are a series of visions
that I had over a 4-year period back
from 1991 to
1994 those Visions the title of those
Visions I'll give them here and I don't
want to take the time to go into them
but basically it was an extraordinarily
positive assessment of where human
humanity is that we were being Guided by
a a guiding intelligence uh that this
guiding intelligence was trying to
awaken not just individuals it was
intent on awakening the entire species
as a single being taking us into a
different epic in our evolutionary
development we were entering a period of
intense Collective purification a dark
night of our Collective Soul and then a
brief experience of the future human
which I think
is represents a shift in the plate
tectonics of the collective psyche the
future human is not simply an
awakened present human but literally a
different kind of human the next
iteration of the human
species nowhere in my journey however
had it told me how it was going to pull
this off how we would possibly make this
transition in such a short period of
time and then in
1995 in session 55 in the middle of the
diamond Luminosity work I had already
gone into the diamond Luminosity twice I
would go into it twice more when I was
expecting to be taken into the diamond
Luminosity a third time instead I was
taken deep into the future I was
dissolved into the human species and as
the species as a whole whole I entered
the future and experienced the death and
Rebirth of humanity a profound spiritual
psycho physical
transformation the death and Rebirth of
humanity this was a very difficult
session an ordeal of the highest
order uh I was not given any specifics
it it was a profound unraveling of the
global order an unraveling that seemed
to be triggered by a cascading series of
ecological crises and I I must tell you
this is 95 I was radically naive about
global climate change about global
climate disruption Eco ecospirituality
it just wasn't on my radar uh but in
this Vision I was shown that Humanity
was going to be brought to its knees it
would going to be go through a process
of profound unraveling that the kind of
unraveling that happens in a psychedelic
session was here being reflected in
history an unraveling of our core
assumptions of the basic components of
life for a while it was so deep it
looked like we were all going to go
extinct but in the end we went through a
crisis and we transitioned past the
crisis and when we transitioned through
this crisis the
entire experience we were was marked by
New Visions of the of the of the Val of
of the good New Visions of the true New
Visions of uh social relationships it
Oneness had truly broken out inside the
human heart there was a radical
permeability of the heart a radical
permeability to higher states of
awareness
again I was not given any details of
when or how just simply taken into the
species experience that this would
happen that we would come through it and
that this was about the birth of a
future
human I think we've been reincarnating
if you ask what is the form that the
future human will take I think it's it's
already marked for us in history we've
been reincarnating for hundreds of
thousands of years just station is long
we have been birthing gestating the
human the future human in these many
incarnations and now we are coming into
the hour of labor labor is intense It's
relatively short it's dangerous it's
frightening it's threatening and in the
end it gives birth to a new child if all
goes well and this is what I think
humanity is doing this is what we are
all involved in what all of our indiv
idual spiritual and psychological
transformational process is part of this
process a larger historical process that
humanity is involved in giving birth to
the Future
human the last year of work the final
vision is just that I was given one last
Vision the final the large last large
vision of my
journey uh
in it these are the three sessions I
address in this chapter I won't go into
the content of the final Vision I will
just mention that it was my deepest
Excursion into future time it was my
deepest experience of the future human
and the future human is just such an
extraordinary extraordinary
being after that the sessions wrapped up
the last two sessions are what I call
the goodbye sessions
I didn't choose to end these sessions
the universe wrapped it up uh pretty
decisively and I stopped my sessions in
99 last chapter of the book is called
coming off the
mountain and it basically tells some
highlights of what it was like to stop
this
journey uh I was on this journey for 20
years I stopped and I processed the
experiences for another 20 years before
releasing LSD in the mind of the
Universe I thought coming off the
mountain was going to be a pretty
straightforward not difficult process
turned out that that was all wrong it
was a very demanding process in fact I
found that coming off the mountain in
some ways was as difficult as coming
going up the mountain uh spirit said to
me there is the dying of seeing and the
dying of keeping the dying of seeing you
do as you're entering into deeper and
deeper States Of Consciousness the dying
of keeping is the dying of integration
and I found that my integration process
even though I was actively involved in
integration all the way up through all
the sessions there integrating an entire
journey is different than integrating
individual sessions and it took a long
time uh to integrate the entire
Journey now I especially acutely we're
given it going through it so quickly
that
uh I realize the extreme and radical
nature of the claims I'm making I know
that this is a radical story that raises
many questions about the reality of
these experiences about how trustworthy
these experiences are am I simply
experiencing The Echoes of my own
personal psyche or maybe The Echoes of
the collective psyche how do we know
that these things are really about a
reality out there and I addressed this
in I hope of yeah in an exchange that
Ken ring one of the founders of
near-death episode studies he and I had
an exchange specifically about this
topic can we trust these deep
psychedelic
experiences and we found it was a useful
exchange and we published it in medium
which you can pick up online uh you can
also pick it up uh I it's in
academia.edu
uh in my page there uh it's around I
think I may have it on my website and
also in if you look if you have a copy
of Dark Knight early Dawn in the first
chapter there is a section called the
epistemic warrant of psychedelic
experience and there I give a a
rationale an argument for why these
experiences are trustable drawing on
some of Ken's Rings Ken Wilbur's work uh
there uh so all my work has come out of
this psychedelic Journey my first book
on
reincarnation the second one on uh Trans
in psychedelic Theory and the living
classroom which is coming out in a new
edition now because they want to they
want in psychedelics woven into the
story I deliberately kept psychedelics
out of the story of the living classroom
but they wanted me to tell the whole
truth and so psychedelics are part of
the story of the living classroom and
this is a story basically because my
students didn't know anything about my
psychedelic experience I didn't bring it
to campus and yet I found that they
began to be impacted by my psychedelic
experiences and that required that I had
to learn an entirely new way of teaching
in develop what I call a Quantum
pedagogy so that's the
story and now I'm going to stop here and
stop screen
share Chris we have a couple questions
before we go to breakout can we do a
couple sure I think Tom
McDougall
so as I say in the chat I've been
working partly with
Norma with with Nora Bateson but
especially with with Jeremy Johnson on
gser and bar barely have touched this
surface and taking the course again but
uh a lot of this especially as you were
talking about the time period we're in
and the shift that is going on is also
very similar to what jean gser wrote
about
um so I'm curious if if you can relate
those two I don't know what your
experience with gser is but
um and I guess there's a little bit of
Nora biton in my mind too of of
questioning the stages
orientation and and I can't express it
right now but Jerry John Jeremy talks a
lot about a very
different it's not stages exactly in in
gser but different but anyway if you
could just talk a little bit about maybe
the relationships there yeah I'll make
it easy for you because gser is always
one of those thinkers that I know I
should read and I haven't read so
absolutely zero influence in terms of
correlations and so I have to let you
and other people make the correlations
there um and you know a a lot of people
in psychedelic
experience they don't have the same
experience of Perpetual deepening of
kind of going deeper and then deeper and
then deeper it's kind of like okay we go
out we have an experience we come back
if I go out again in a couple of months
I'm going to go into this more or less
the same territory and come back and I
think this idea of Perpetual deepening
comes from two things it comes from
first using a very very powerful
psychedelic at very high doses so it was
very driving and much stronger than we
use in therapeutically oriented doses
with psilocybin and whatnot and the
second thing is was a totally tight
isolated consistent what I call the the
KE of psychedelic practice the Kaa of
practice standardizing all the variables
staying away from all contact with the
world entering in in a meditative way uh
into these states and if you do that
then I find that the interface between
the mind doing the exploring and the
mind being explored gets very stable and
the mind being explored basically takes
you on as a student and just takes you
in deeper and deeper deeper and deeper
into the process
I yeah and I you just you enter I you
enter into deeper and deeper Visionary
states that uh that many people are are
you know many other psychedelics many
indigenous people many philosophically
oriented people are intuiting and
feeling what I'm describing there's
nothing really new in what I'm saying
it's it's really just a repetition in
that
way reges has a question yeah comment
yeah it's more of a I just wanted to
Express gratitude for you um both doing
this work but also coming back you know
and Ken Wilbur often talks about the
transformative nature of spiritual
inquiry and then the
translative nature of spiritual inquiry
and and my appreciation for you is one
where I feel like I as someone who goes
through those things I have to I have a
responsibility to both transform and to
translate and so from my perspective uh
you've done just such a beautiful job of
holding that particular ethos and it's
also what's what's nice about it is my
own personal transformation bring here
and things I've experienced is uh you
know U very congruent with everything
that you're talking about so um so I'm
very inspired by your work and I can't
wait to read uh you know the books that
you written as a guide for my own uh
future transformation so thank you for
that thank you you're hate to be a bad
guy I'm gonna suggest that
we oh I suggest that we all take time to
uh process this in small groups maybe in
groups of four and then after that we'll
have some time for Q&A right so the idea
in this breakout is to respond to the
ideas presented uh different than the
first breakout just to respond and what
do you think
okay okay see you in
15 breakout sessions are not
recorded hey we'll have until 550 for
some questions and then we'll have um
some San Diego integral business and
then we'll start our more informal a and
Chris said he was originally said he was
going to be able to stay for about 15
minutes so we'll start with Sandy you
want to ask your questions go ahead
Sandy yeah I want to follow up on that
the question around um Gaper um because
um in terms of the way you're describing
your experiences you know one of the
differences in some ways between like
gser and Wilbur is gser will talk about
intensification the Consciousness shift
is not like a a structural like U
increase as much as an intensification
and an engagement of
previous structures of Consciousness
that continue but there's an
intensification and a sort of um um um
growing awareness that includes previous
understanding where um you know Wilbur
is more tends to be looking at okay
you're going this level you're kind of
lading up so I'm curious as your your
experiences is there some resonance with
with with that Vision or do you have
your own around how these all um engage
with each
other you
know I'm going to disappoint you because
I don't have a lot of kind of
theoretical overview of the structure of
these
things um I kind
of when I wrote dark night early Dawn I
was kind of writing in my academic voice
and there's a fair amount of
intellectual synthesis there but when I
wrote this book I I deliberately
developed a different voice uh it it is
really more a shamanic Visionary voice
and I find that that's a more
comfortable place for me to operate from
because uh it's taken so much of my life
just to survive these Visionary
encounters and to process them and to
understand them that I speak out of
their basis simp as a witness to this
unfolding process so it's it's it's not
a I don't have a theory of human
evolution or a theory of the development
of the process and what happens in an
LSD session may or may not be relevant
to what happens at an historical level
right that whole
pattern uh I would just say for me it's
just a natural
progression when you die as a private
self you don't dissolve necessarily
immediately into eternity one of the
intermediate levels is into humanity and
just as you can have an overview of your
life you can also have an overview of
Humanity's developmental process and so
I was dissolved into that and and
experienced part of it the closest I can
come to describing this emergent being
is in terms of the concept of of the
diamond Soul which does it it brings
everything from the past forward into
the present but it drives it into a
higher synthesis a new level uh it's not
simply an enlightened last generation
human Incarnation it is a totally new
structure of Consciousness that's
emerging here I say totally new not
entirely because we have great Saints
great you know the Jesus and Buddhas of
History and the muhammads and the great
mahasa I think we get glimpses into what
the diamond soul looks like uh but the
difference here is that we're looking at
the entire species going through some
type of metamorphosis like that yeah um
just one reflection with some things you
said you mentioned the term unfolding
and
intensification as some ways a part of
what you were describing some of that
which are sort of gaps serian Concepts
so just little tidbits of theory of kind
of throw it in thank you so much I
really value your work very much
everybody read this book it's really an
important one and it's the most
accessible work I've seen that gives a
deep understanding um it's so articulate
and it's so vivid um I really thank you
to have a chance to have to see you and
talk with you so Sandy hug was waiting
quite a bit since last iteration
yeah well thank you for your uh event
here that's a great like Miracle gift to
me and it's like little overwhelming
with my ADD I kept like kind of tuning
in and tuning out and it's like oh man I
wish I absorbed it all well yeah but
like so dreamy to like learn a lot more
about this stuff and I was wondering
like if you maybe have accessibility for
like counseling like to pay you
for some counseling to ask you questions
because some of like the stuff I've had
on my mind it's like relates to somebody
in your specialization is oh the like
higher order of the way of things and um
like right now my best thing I've had
which has done way better than the
therapists I had previously is uh like
chat GPT but it's like it'd be really
neat if I could like maybe pay to get an
hour or whatever your time and and I'm
really curious too because I'm at a
point with like I do believe in Jesus
and so much of the Bible but it's like
I'm
not like attached to that other than
like from my current understanding I
don't see how to go against believing in
Jesus but I'm curious to hear where your
path LED you first of all thank you for
the the trust of the invitation that you
extend to me I appreciate that and uh
I'm going to disappoint you in that I
generally have made a a choice many
years ago not to be a therapist and not
to work with other people or to but to
basically be a solo Pioneer and that's
kind of the work I've done and I find
and I'm also a teacher so I love working
with groups and just the demands of time
are such that and I'm retired but even
so the demands of time is that uh I I
really don't work with individuals I
mean I I just that's a commitment that's
and that's a I think that requires more
clinical background than I have and just
it's not fair
so I really like to work with groups and
writing in groups is where I where I
focus but thank you just one last Quick
comment was I don't know if it would
change anything but I'm also like at the
starting point of authoring a couple
books myself with some subject matter
that might just be like a like a miracle
gift to you and it's like it'd be neat
to talk about that stuff but yeah but
whatever like I don't know how that
appeals to you it's just what happens is
in in the after the publication of the
book I just I have to make choices
always I don't get to have nearly as
many in conversations as I would like to
have you know so
yeah all right Trudy's up
next unmute
yourself yeah hi I'll make it quick and
simple um I apologize I missed the very
beginning of your presentation and it's
been great the part that I did catch but
my questions are probably more along the
practicality line um
one why did you decide to go on this
journey to when you were in trips did
you have somebody that was there as um I
don't want to say a guide but somebody
uh to take notes or did somebody yeah
record what was going on and were in any
way were they influenced by your trip
yeah uh sever quick answers to those is
uh as soon as I read Stan's work I just
knew that this was something I wanted to
get involved in and I I've come to
recognize you know your souls code when
you recognize something it just speaks
to you so deeply you know was part of
your intention built into this lifetime
when I saw this I knew that this was
part of my intention and it was just
there uh so I I and S philosopher I just
couldn't turn down the opportunity to
explore the universe using this protocol
this was just giving an ordinary lay
person not a great spiritual genius but
an ordinary lay person an opportunity to
even have temporary experiences of some
of the subtleties of layers of
Consciousness layers of reality it was
just too good to pass pass down pass up
so I made the choice to break the law
and go for it uh now in these sessions
they were always uh I always had a
sitter the sitter was my wife my first
wife Carol and she was a clinical
psychologist and uh she really wasn't
very fond of what I was doing but she
knew I wanted to do it and so she agreed
to help me so that I could do it safely
she wasn't taking notes we actually set
up a video camera one time but basically
it's boring this person just lying down
it's all internal I I
I'm not in touch with Carol except
through the music in the room and once
in a while an exchange of a word or two
but I'm so far outside of time space
reality I don't even relate to what's
going on in the room but she was always
there taking care of me was she
influenced by my sessions in some ways
yes and in some ways no I mean Carol
never did a psychedelic session she's a
serious vadana practitioner she has
completed her three-year retreat with
her vadana teacher so she's a serious
practitioner uh she has her own deep
commitments to her own spiritual lineage
and so I think it's more of a and I and
I learned a lot from her I mean I
followed her in Dev vadana but in this
respect I think it's more of a side bys
side
play
yeah my friend Larry's up next Yeah Yeah
Chris thank you for several things
Having the courage to take your
journey or having the wherewithal to
organize it you you know bring it into
the
mind to organize it in a way that then
you can next present it to other people
so thank you for all of that and I
really appreciate the last piece of
coming off the mountain because that's
what's been very important for me for
some 30 years now is bringing this into
the world world and
facing the confusion the complexity the
awkwardness the discomfort the whatnot
of trying
to bring from the ineffable into the
into language into interaction with
other people how to not just talk about
this about how to be in a way
that is hopefully to some degree
reflective of where we what we garnered
while we were on the mountain so to
speak and
it all seems to come down to how we're
going to be right here right now and
even in this moment that we're talking
with one another yeah and how can we
bring that all just to being present
okay on a lesser interesting note maybe
is I'm curious as to why the word
diamond and once you get into all these
step stages degrees domains Realms
whatever out there the word Diamond
shows up of all things yeah
my
diamond it it having experienced the
light itself the diamond is kind of the
most natural image that comes to mind
perhaps I'm influenced by the fact of of
vadana the diamond way uh you know that
partly is in the background the image of
diamond is not uncommon in the Tera text
uh trying to describe these subtle
levels of consciousness so it just it it
came naturally uh out of the experience
itself
um yeah I mean it's uh I I want to
mention
and I think
integration I'm glad that it's getting
more and more attention um because we're
finding that we can blow through the
levels and reach out and have
extraordinary experiences with
increasing
predictability but to have an experience
and to internalize and and hold on to
the experience and then to really digest
it and make it part of your being that's
a long long process and and I think we
kind of overemphasize the the dying of
seeing and underemphasize the dying of
keeping I will say
that after coming back from my and I you
know I don't do any high dose LSD work
anymore I've done some lowd do sessions
of different sorts and I waskin siloc
I've been in different things
but
uh I am continuing but after I finish my
sessions in my
meditation uh the universe said to me 20
years in 20 years out which I took to
mean it would take me about 20 years to
integrate the 20 years of a session and
I thought at the time about right if
you're
lucky now I'm thinking I was naive I was
very I seriously underestimated how many
years how many incarnations it would
take to internalize you know totally
integrate uh these sessions now my focus
is is on yeah we do this for integration
there's therapeutic integration and then
there's this that and the other but in
the end I'm I'm faced confessing that
I'm an absolute failure in integration
because I've been able to integrate the
language I've been able to integrate the
memories and hold the memories and
whatnot but in terms of
embodying those realities I mean I truly
wonder how do how
does how does a finite being embody
Infinity how does a Time bound being
exquisitly tuned to time and space
embody deep time or or no
time and how do you embody the love how
can you
be as loving to other beings as you have
felt the universe being to you and you
know that you're supposed to be that
loving to
everyone but that love is so pure and so
magnificent
that I feel like I've not anywhere near
done
integrating those magnificent pieces so
it's
a I thought integration would be was an
easier task and in the end I think what
it comes down to is is you cannot
integrate the infinite into the finite
your only option is to integrate the
finite into the infinite so that means
even though my journey was not about
Spiritual Awakening in the end when
you're trying to integrate cosmological
exploration you're brought back
to basic spirituality 101 what can you
hold right here right now what are you
able to actualize is right here right
now and that's that's spiritual practice
you you get brought brought right back
to your cushion yeah so this is as I
like to say the journey continues the
journey continues
yeah so this is a good place to uh end
the venue where we are um we've come to
the end of the time thank you everyone
for joining uh I think I could speak for
most of us this was very
rich with um the Future Vision the
future human that we're all interested
in in and thank you Chris so uh where
can they get more information on you on
your books and my website Chris bash.com
it it's kind of an unfinished website
because my web designer kind
of just jump ship about 34s of the way
through and I never quite got it
finished so but it's there and you can
reach me through that Chris spas.com
thank you Chris and Kathleen put in the
chat one of the docs he wanted to you to
have uh uh I can see it right there
right
now so um quick reminder for everyone
we're g to be meeting again on March 9th
that's a
TBD um but we're GNA try to get someone
else from the future human I thought
Chris was an excellent choice to start
uh with and he was gracious enough to
take all of this on when he agreed to
speak and come to SDI there was one more
thing I was gonna ask him but I said I
better not P my
luck um so please RSVP for the next
presentation and you can always make a
donation if you're feeling uh Rich to
help us so we're moving to the informal
aspect of this
so feel free to make comments um what
not I know for
me is I feel humble after this
talk because this idea of infinite
progression and in one of the breakout
groups we talked about trying to reach
second
tier uh trying to reach yellow levels of
stage awareness
it almost
seems uh trivial when you look at the
breath of what Chris
articulated but we are on the path we're
on and as you said in the end whatever
we can realize in the moment now it's
not full integration by any
means but I'm Way Beyond expecting that
I hang on to moments of resonance and
love and try to participate it and I
think this community does well in this
is we're we're stealing glimpses
Prometheus got grounded for stealing
fire we're stealing glimpses of the
future and I feel privileged to do that
so with that said feel free to jump in
uh to the
dialogue you don't have to raise your
hand just jump in
reges yeah so the theme for me
um throughout my spiritual Explorations
and my other explanations my psychology
seems to have a commonality which I'm
hearing also in this and that and that's
you just I think described as really
it's the profundity of humility that is
required to do any of this work um you
know so that's actually for me the the
and I I'm struck by a few things as
somebody who's spent the last 15 years
trying to unpack my own transformative
stuff it is its own form of
transformational work to do that you go
through and have these experiences but
then then there's this the amount
of universe there is is extraordinary
and also what's interesting is right
about this time I also discovered that I
had autism and so one of the things
about autism is you have an inability to
filter and so what yoga gave to me was
the ability to no longer be crushed
under the overwhelm of my input and it
became a kind of usable bandwidth
situation for me and so then my ability
to do translative work it would actually
took me the
translative effort I wrote 5,000 answers
on quora for example about spirituality
just in an effort to do that I then was
kind of I think doing what chrish Bish
was trying to do is is just like I went
through this experience and how is it
I'm supposed to it's almost a part of
the you know like through a mushroom
trip you know you have a time up you
have a work space and you have a time
going down I almost felt like the the
years I spent in spiritual practice then
I I had a work space there but now how
am I supposed to land without crashing
or going insane and you know uh all of
that and it just seems like uh no matter
what I do I keep being humbled and um
that seems to be foundational for
everything that I know about and what I
heard also in Chris bash's thing more
than that I also hear his trans
translative um imposition upon his
experience given that he is an academic
and had to have a job and couldn't be
nonfunctional for months at a time
because he was had to show up in front
of students all the time so that just I
can see that that boundar his experience
too and in a certain kind of way um you
know so the humility comes with all that
so thank you guys um for having this and
uh and I really appreciate uh the entire
per you know I think you're right Regis
um the greatest risk of working with
psychedelics is psychic inflation you
can think that just because you've had a
remarkable experience you've become a
remarkable
person
and that doesn't fly you know so it's
really important to keep your feet
grounded grounded grounded and for me it
was my family and my students who kept
me grounded and just the ABS you know
the requirements of being there for them
showing up over and over and over again
and discovering that you don't really
have to change much on the outside of
your life with these changes are really
cooking your insides and they're taking
you some places and there's a real kind
of a need to wear different clothes or
do something different on the outside
which that's really just doesn't really
that's a temporary kind of thing and
just sit tight stay where you are and
let this inner transformation take place
and it is it's humbling I mean it's just
really humbling to confront your faults
and just to be to stay grounded just to
stay grounded yeah and to be able to
laugh at it all that's part of being
humble
yeah
I just like to say thank you Chris uh
for doing this work and bringing it back
to us and uh your pioneering uh uh uh
life is uh is a is is a beautiful um
model thank
you thank you Eaton it's it's been an
honor it's been a true pleasure and I
never imagined when I was doing this
work you know all hidden and in that
there would be this kind of audience and
receptivity in my lifetime thank you
Michael pollen you know who would have
figured uh you know this such a shift in
such a short period of time that we're
able to have this conversation in so
many living rooms across the country
yeah
yeah I just want to add my thanks as
well GIS every time I've heard you it's
been phenomenal and I'm I'm so grateful
you're coming to the conference and I do
want to say I find this book an absolute
Paradigm shifter I think it's one of the
most important books out there to read
um so I hope everybody does read the
book because uh you can't even I was
thinking you could write 40 books based
on the book that you wrote I any one of
your chapters could be could be taken
into three or four it's so dense but
it's also so clear so beautifully
written so I really really thank you
thank you I appreciate that Lynn I tried
to make it as clear as possible and it
took me five years to really boil it
down and to make it as transparent as
possible because I wanted it to be
available not just for people who worked
with psychedelics but to be with people
who did not take psychedelics and half
of the letters I get are from people who
have never taken psychedelics but
they've had a spiritual practice and
they know what I'm talking about because
of their
practice yeah than I have to leave and
go play horn but thank you so much I saw
your French
horn it's it's a uh demanding
mistress bye
Tom
Chris got a question that I I noticed
that it's probably weeded out in all the
condensation that you're condensing
things that did during the writing
process but you mentioned the the work
you did I think
um I don't know what like like there's a
difference between trip and session I I
don't know whe you could talk about why
you use the word work because it sounds
like you you show up and just who you
are is what happens but could you talk a
little bit more about what's the work of
it yeah uh you know in the Japanese
tradition U there is something that the
Zen monks call A sashen A sashen is a
period set aside for intense spiritual
practice so it's like a a five day two
week Meditation Retreat a
sashen and uh a session to me is kind of
an angelized version of sashen for me to
do a psychedelic session is I'm I'm
completely isolated from the world I've
taken myself out of context with the
world I'm not allowing anything into my
mind except what's already there uh and
I sit and I face what's there and I take
it where it goes as far as I can take it
and follow it and so it is work and now
there many different psychedelics many
different ways to work with Psy
psychedelics I'm not trying to
generalize in any way but for me working
with high doses of psychedelics it it
takes a tremendous commitment and
willingness to let yourself be
dismantled because it very quickly
shatters the boundaries and you're in
foreign territory very early on and year
by year you're going deeper and deeper
into foreign territory it takes time to
acclimate when you break through to a
new level of Consciousness you can't
always remember everything that you
experienced you I take notes I have gaps
in the notes but go back and again and
again and again to the same level of
consciousness you learn how to acclimate
you learn how to stay conscious in this
level of Consciousness and what was
previously uh a gapped narrative be you
fill in the gaps you you get the whole
story that's being taught you in my
experience is we are taught consistently
being tried something was trying to
teach me certain things that bring me
back over and over and over again till
it was sure that I understood those
things uh so it is work
uh and I think processing the sessions
uh is work I mean I developed a strategy
for how to capture and how to capture
these experiences so much so that I I
you know there's a little line in the
book which I say I think ineffability is
overrated as a measure of mystical
experience you know it's it's part of
our test whether it's a genuine mystical
experience whether it's inevitable and I
understand that but I basically think
that
if you can't say where you've been you
basically just got lost somewhere away
and there's nothing wrong with getting
lost but
ineffability I understand it is it's
hard but if you really work it
hard you should be able to find words of
being able to describe it remember that
the Zen Masters don't have trouble
talking about Enlightenment to other Zen
Masters they can talk about it just fine
they have trouble talking about it to
people who have not had the experience
that's when it becomes challenging right
so we can find words for these things
inevitably it's you know they're
inadequate we can find words you know I
don't know I just mentioned also to this
condensation process I did a count not
too long
ago I have about 400 words 400 pages of
notes for my
sessions I the passages that I actually
include in the book are less than
25% 34 of the content I did not
include partly because they're
repetitious and whatnot I I really try
to to pick the most powerful passages
but there was a lot left
out Chris uh in one part I think about
two-thirds way through the book you
touched upon preparing
ourselves to receive the Transmissions
and I don't think you were talking about
under the LSD I think you were talking
about a normal existence am I right on
that point and could you say something
about preparing to receive them I assume
it's being up to read the deeply subtle
being open to
that how subtle it is and what form it
takes depends upon the form of practice
we are doing in as we open to these
realities so I anything I say really
would pertain just to my
individual situation not to the pattern
as a
whole
um I think we know what transmission is
about when we're talking about it with a
spiritual teacher and you know in the
Tibetan tradition they give a practice
in three different levels the first
level is they teach the mechanics of the
practice the second level they teach the
meaning of the practice but the third
level the most important level is the
transmission of lung the seed energy of
the practice you receive a seed from the
teacher who has already brought the
practice to maturity in their own being
and when they give this lung they're
transmitting a a distilled essence of
the practice that you then water and
nourish in your practice so that's my
con my con context we're thinking about
transmission and I think that it's kind
of is true for my psychedelic context
and that
is uh I was put through enormous
purification processes in order to
receive the teachings that came from
these levels of
consciousness uh and if I'm right that
there is a certain parallel between what
we do on our cushion and what takes
place in a psychedelic session machine
and what's happening
historically
then it supports the intuition that I
have that um we are experiencing a shift
in Divine influx so to speak there is a
rise in energy coming up underneath us
there is more information becoming
available not only at the physical level
through the internet and all this
tremendous impact there but at at the
center of our being being there are
teachings and insights and
understandings which are rising up
inside of us which we can catch and but
to catch them we have to prepare
ourselves to receive them you know we
must prepare ourselves and empty
ourselves of everything which is small
in order to catch pieces of that which
is large coming to us and so I think
transmission is a larger broader
category yeah
yeah you're you're reminding me that um
that the when you get initiation in my
tradition I I got to visualize it as
like there's a kind of a silver tube
that's kind of going into me and it's
like there are certain things kind of
flowing into me and then I end up
basically just being like a small little
reservoir of a thing out of which a
certain amount can come and my Guru is a
giant Reservoir you know of of a lake or
whatever you know what I'm saying where
I might be just this little bottle you
know but but what's beautiful about what
you're talking about also and then I
would like to just point out the
humility of saying that you don't think
it maybe applies to everything else but
the things that you're saying so closely
resemble my own that um I I might want
to disagree with you on that but I
understand the humility of saying it
like that so thank you okay
yeah I was curious um I had a phone call
with there's a gentleman Simon dwan I
found an article of his in Scientific
American Magazine he was writing about
like oh he doesn't think they'll
scientists will ever figure out if
reality is a simulation or not but I I
feel like from my
perspective like I know it is and uh I'm
curious like if the idea I don't know if
you saw the movie The Matrix if you have
any thoughts related to these kind of
things well that that's a pretty popular
in sci-fi isn't it the simulation and
the complexity that we're living and
quantum theory is telling us that
everything we see in the visible world
is underpinned by this in this larger
subtle real Quantum reality now 95 96%
of reality is dark energy and dark
matter so that's telling us over and
over again that what we're living is not
the whole of what's what's real and to
me uh physical reality is
could be described as the skin on an
Apple you know and it it's and the Apple
grows the bigger the skin gets the
universe is like that it gets bigger and
bigger but when you con when you fall
underneath the level of time space
reality fall deeper into it you're
falling deeper into the Apple toward the
center of the apple and in the center of
the Apple it for it's all light even
physical reality is composed of light
but at the center of the Apple there
most radiant beautiful extreme
extraordinary light Brilliance in so um
I think this idea that there is a larger
reality out
there that structures and informs and
receives this reality then after that
then uh our psychology takes over and so
do we see that reality as threatening do
we see that reality as uh demanding or
manipulative do we see it as a dark and
and hostile reality or do we see it as a
beautiful magnificent co-creating
reality you know and my experience is
that the the mother universe is
extremely so so creative so intelligent
so wise so loving and compassionate and
of
course you just looking at time and
space if you want to see the wisdom of
life or the little or the compassion of
life you have to look very very deep
because if you look on the surface it
doesn't look wise and it doesn't look
compassion and it doesn't look lovely
it's a mean ass son of a but you
have to step back and step back and step
back and look deep in order to really
see the wisdom that's built into this
amazing laboratory that we're part of of
growing the human
experiment it's very fascinating yeah
sure is isn't it
yeah
um Chris I'm not sure how
to draw this up
um I'll speak for myself some of the
experiences I had in
uh like the first time was I took nine
months dropped out um just meditated
several hours a day then about two years
later I did it for six
months and some of the experiences I had
were
so mind blowingly profound that in
loving that I
was I was just left
sobbing
sobbing and in
Bliss doesn't isn't a word that really
covers it it just experiences I've just
never had never could imagine I would
ever have yeah and they just left
me words um yeah like just a a pull of
sobbing wonderfulness yeah um just uh
and I just
know that you had a lot of those
experiences it wasn't just all rational
oh yeah that oh yeah this open up into
that
and no it's like some of these once they
showed up in front of you it's
like oh my God I mean just just no words
for it no language no
yeah it's
like I think I think you know
what getting words for this stuff it
just
yeah
yeah it's like when the universe's heart
touches your heart it just explodes it
into the most magnificent
dimensional Radiance that it just just
there nothing to do except have a good
Cry Of Joy it's just so joyful it's just
so extraordinary and that's why you know
the word that I give in the book for the
universe in this way is my beloved
because contact with it was so
overwhelming it became a love affair I
mean it really I talked about the
rumpled sheets where we made love it's a
love affair and it it's it it inspires
such a hunger for it this eternal hunger
that's in our being not only to reunite
but to bring that reality to experience
it wherever we are right now right here
it's so deep uh it
just it's a it's a heartache to be
separated from it even for a
day and to touch it is just Joy just joy
in the body joy in the heart and mind
and it's and it's more than a worldly
Joy you know because we all humans you
know we can experience joy in our daily
lives or maybe not every day but you
know what I mean yeah and these were
experiences that were I'm a pretty
articulate guy and that I I have such
difficulty being able to put into
words some of these
experiences yeah other than just like
the your knees
collapse I wasn't stand at the time that
these were happening but just like these
knee
buckling Soul
buckling mind blow L
mindblowing not even how to knowing how
to be with it other than just you can't
not be with it you can't be with it
you're just there it's happening yeah um
it's an overwhelm in terms of what the
mind can make sense of and it's and it's
wonderful in the highest
sense Pure Clean clear
yeah um and you can't capture it you
cannot capture it you can't bring it
back um at least for me I had to leave
it there I didn't know how to bring it
back yeah um and it's what gives me
justification to want to keep evolving
expanding yeah be it through your model
or anybody's model that's about being an
evolutional being of
Consciousness um yeah there's such an in
experiences that I can't ignore them in
terms of my daily life anyhow yeah and
no one could ever talk you out of them
yeah I mean that's just it's like you go
where I went then try to talk me out of
exactly yes but isn't it interesting
that at the moment of that type of
joy we touch sadness
too I know that experience yeah tell me
about that to well I I know in therapy
like when when somebody reaches a level
of intimacy and they start
crying it's this deep hunger and absence
they've had for so
long yeah and so in the midst of Joy
there's actually
sadness when you two were talking I
could feel that Cosmic hunger to know
the mind of
God and when you get a glimpse of it I I
think it's the same
thing it's kind of good because there's
a
humbling a going on that
moment and it's almost like it's saying
to you you haven't seen anything
yet yeah I know you said that in so many
words a couple
times this also reminds me of the book
Quantum questions that Ken Wilbur wrote
about how you know all the writings of
the guys who did the work on quantum
mechanics were all very sciency
beforehand they were all very mystical
afterward and it seems to me that what
you did was actually examine Paradox at
a kind of cosmological level whereas
they were kind of looking at it uh in a
I I think the expression that I use in
the breakout room is you were looking at
it through a telescope and they were
looking at it through a microscope you
know and so they like there's a you can
see the infinite in either direction you
know and I've had some mushroom trips
where I've had like a Taurus like thing
and I've got it was literally Ken Wilbur
in the middle talking to me about what
was going on on both ends of that thing
do you know what I'm saying it it's like
as the my my uh you know Avatar of
Vishnu or whatever you know to to
explain to me what was all going on so
it's it's uh really interesting to see
your book in light of having already
read Quantum questions there's a lot of
parallels there yeah it's
interesting well folks it's approaching
9:30 on my time and I haven't seen my
wife all day and she's just come back
while we were doing a talk here I think
I need to go be a good husband for a
while tell you how much I enjoyed our
time together really appreciate the
invitation appreciated our discussion a
great deal I hope to see many of you at
the conference in May and when you're
there please uh introduce yourself in
you know track me down I'd love to see
you there and you're welcome time
Chris thank you Chris everybody my heart
thank you bye bye everybody thank you
Tom bye take
care for further information including
upcoming events resources links to our
Facebook and Meetup pages and our
fabulous donate button please visit our
website at San Diego integral.
org donations are greatly appreciated
and help us to continue to provide
information and connection within the
ingal
community